Step 2-B: Pre-processing Data
The raw data that you get directly from
your sources are never in the format that
you need to perform analysis on.
There are two main goals in
the data pre-processing step.
The first is to clean the data to
address data quality issues, and
the second is to transform the raw
data to make it suitable for analysis.
A very important part of data preparation
is to address quality
of issues in your data.
Real-world data is messy.
There are many examples of quality issues
with data from real applications including
inconsistent data like a customer with two
different addresses, duplicate customer
records, for example, customers address
recorded at two different sales locations.
And the two recordings don't agree.
Missing customer agent demographics or
studies.
Missing values like missing a customer
age in the demographic studies.
invalid data like an invalid zip code for
example, a six digit code.
And outliers like a sense of failure
causing values to be much higher or
lower than expected for a period of time.
Since we get the data downstream
we usually have little control
over how the data is collected.
Preventing data quality problems as
the data is being collected is not
often an option.
So we have the data that we get and
we have to address quality issues
by detecting and correcting them.
Here are some approaches we can take
to address this quality issues.
We can remove data records
with missing values.
We can merge duplicate records.
This will require a way to determine
how to resolve conflicting values.
Perhaps it makes sense to retain the newer
value whenever there's a conflict.
For invalid values, the best estimate for
a reasonable value can be
used as a replacement.
For example, for
a missing age value for an employee,
a reasonable value can be estimated based
on the employee's length of employment.
Outliers can also be removed if
they are not important to the task.
In order to address data
quality issues effectively,
knowledge about the application,
such as how the data was collected,
the user population, and the intended
uses of the application is important.
This domain knowledge is
essential to making informed
decisions on how to handle incomplete or
incorrect data.
The second part of preparing data
is to manipulate the clean data into
the format needed for analysis.
The step is known by many names.
Data manipulation,
data preprocessing, data wrangling,
and even data munging, some operations for
this type of operation I mean data
munging, wrangling, preprocessing,
include, scaling, transformation,
feature selection,
dimensionality reduction,
and data manipulation.
Scaling involves changing the range of
values to be between a specified range.
Such as from zero to one.
This is done to avoid having certain
features that large values from
dominating the results.
For example,
in analyzing data with height and weight.
To magnitude of weight values is much
greater than of the height values.
So scaling all values
to be between zero and
one will equalize contributions from
both height and weight features.
Various transformations can be performed
on the data to reduce noise and
variability.
One such transformation is aggregation.
Aggregate data generally results
in data with less variability,
which may help with your analysis.
For example, daily sales figures
may have many serious changes.
Aggregating values to weekly or monthly
sales figures will result in similar data.
Other filtering techniques can also be
used to remove variability in the data.
Of course, this comes at
the cost of less detailed data.
So these factors must be weighed for
the specific application.
Future selection can involve removing
redundant or irrelevant features,
combining features, and
creating new features.
During the exploring data step,
you might have discovered that
two features are correlated.
In that case one of these
features can be removed
without negatively affecting
the analysis results.
For example,
the purchase price of a product and
the amount of sales tax paid,
are likely to be correlated.
Eliminating the sales tax amount,
then will be beneficial.
Removing redundant or
irrelevant features will make
the subsequent analysis much simpler.
In other cases, you may want to combine
features or create new ones.
For example,
adding the applicant's education level
as a feature to a loan approval
application would make sense.
There are also algorithms to automatically
determine the most relevant features,
based on various mathematical properties.
Dimensionality reduction is useful when
the data set has a large number of
dimensions.
It involves finding a smaller
subset of dimensions that
captures most of
the variation in the data.
This reduces the dimensions of the data
while eliminating irrelevant features and
makes analysis simpler.
A technique commonly used for
dimensional reduction is called
principle component analysis or PCA.
Raw data often has to be manipulated to
be in the correct format for analysis.
For example, from samples recording
daily changes in stock prices,
we may want the capture price changes for
a particular market segments
like real estate or health care.
This would require determining which
stocks belong to which market segment.
Grouping them together, and
perhaps computing the mean, range,
standard deviation for each group.
In summary,
data preparation is a very important
part of the data science process.
In fact, this is where you will spend most
of your time on any data science effort.
It can be a tedious process,
but it is a crucial step.
Always remember, garbage in, garbage out.
If you don't spend the time and
effort to create good data for the
analysis, you will not get good results
no matter how sophisticated
the analysis technique you're using is.